[music] Hello and welcome to lesson six part one where we will finally begin to go into dataf frames and in this part of the lesson on how to index and filter data frames. All right. So what are dataf frames? Well you can think of data frames as basically a series of vectors that are bound together. So different columns in a data frame can be of different variable types. Um and they're essentially what contains all of the data that you had collected in the field or the lab. Really in you know if you've

been working with any kind of data up until now um any kind of Excel spreadsheet is typically a form of a data frame. And so you can you can think of the analogy as data frames in R are essentially the spreadsheets that hold your data uh in Excel. So, let's just create a data frame from a few vectors uh as a better way to kind of see what I mean. Let's say we've got species one through five. Okay. [snorts] Make that into the arrow. All right. Then we have heights. We've got 57, 45,

62, 49, and 58. on those two. Okay, so now we have height and species, two vectors of the same length. And then all we're going to do is create a variable called height data. And into this we'll put we'll use the function data frame to create the data frame species height. That's it. All right. So now you'll see in the global environment a new section has opened up here. So before we had just individual values and now we have a data header here uh that includes um all of our data frames. And there's a little

arrow here where you can drop down and actually see the contents or at least the the different variable types um and and a few of the first entries in each column of the data frame. So in this case species is character and we see a few of the first values and then height is numeric and we see these values. We can also let's so let's just run this as well. So you can see the data frame pop up here and again we have these two columns. These numbers here represent the row names and these are the column

names and we have these different values. We can also view our data view our data frame in a special viewer by clicking on the the value here in our global environment. And here we can see a nice table uh spreadsheet style of our data frame. We can also view the names the column names and the uh row names using the names and the row.names function. So if we just do names height data, we get species and height. And if we do rownames, height data, we get these numbers that we were looking at before. These are

automatically generated when they weren't specified. We can also see how many total rows this data frame has using the n row function and how many columns using the end call function. So and row five rows and call two columns. And note that if we were to use the length function, which we've used on vectors before to find how long they are or how many elements there are, we get a length of two. And that's because with data frames, length represents the number of columns. So you can also use length in place of

of end call. And then we can get a neat summary of everything that's in our data frame using the str function. And this basically shows us what's up in the in the environment panel up here. But it shows us that height data is a data frame of five observations or five rows of two variables or two columns. And then here it shows us the first one is species and it's a character variable with a few of the first entries here. And then the height is a numeric variable with these entries here. Okay,

let's move on to how to index and filter data frames. So as with vectors we can also index data frames but this time we have more than one dimension. We have both rows and columns. And so if you think of a data frame as just a bunch of vectors bound together then to index those vectors first we supply where along those vectors we are searching or which row and then which of the vectors we are searching through um or which column to look through. So the row index followed by the column index. And so it becomes

something as simple as height data row let's say we're looking for row four and then we just add a comma in there and then column two. When we run this we get the value of 45. When we run just height data al together we can see that row four column 2 is the value of 49. Did I say 45? 49. Um, and so it took me quite a while to remember that the first value is always the row and the second value is the column. Gosh, even even five or six years into using R, you know, after spending enough time away from it over

field season, I would still find myself um googling whether rows or columns comes first. And now it comes second nature. But um, don't worry if you feel a little frustrated at first. It's it's a little bit um, a little arbitrary. You can also instead of specifying the the index values just like you would with vectors, you can specify the names. So height data row 4 column heights or excuse me height. And since the column is is named height, we can refer to it directly by quoting that column name in here. And so we get

that same value of 49. If you want to index an entire row or an entire column, just leave the other index value empty. So if we did height data, let's say we want all of column of row four, then we do the the comma and we leave it at that. And so here we get all of row four, which includes species 4 and the height of 49. Now, note that if we didn't include the comma, if we just did that, we would actually get an error. And so, the error is sort of self-explanatory though, though, just an

important note to make that when you're indexing um a data frame if all you put in is just one index value, you actually it automatically refers to the columns. So in this case, the error was because there's no column in position 4 since I did not specify rows. So just to prevent errors, always make sure when you're working with data frames that you include both um you know, if you really wanted only column one, I would I would enter something like this just to make sure that um there isn't any confusion

over perhaps you have a vector named something similar that is not an actual data frame and you only want it to refer to the first element. Um but in this case you're you're using the correct syntax for a data frame. And again just like with with vectors we can add in whatever combination of uh indexing criteria we want for selecting whatever aspects of the data frame we want. So we could do let's say we want rows two through four and we want everything all the columns I mean um that include rows two through

four and when we run that we get exactly what we would expect. So there's one more way to index or to select particular columns in a data frame and that's using the dollar sign operator. The way we do that is type in the um data frame we want to index and then put in a dollar sign and immediately you get this really nice handy window that pops up showing us the possible columns that we can select. So we can just type them in or just select them here. And what this does is it extracts all the values in the species

column as its own vector of values. So that's basically it. This is probably one of the easiest ways to extract particular columns from a data frame. It's very intuitive because you see the column name here. You don't have to refer to it by numbers or by position and you don't have to refer to it um using using quotes. So you know if we did this would basically give us the same thing and not basically I mean it literally would give us the same thing but this can be a little bit more

cumbersome to write and this is a little bit more more intuitive right all right now I really want you to start working with real data now so or at least data that looks fairly real so that you can really begin getting used to what this is like as soon as possible. And in the next module, I'm going to go over how to upload data. But for now, we'll use a data set that comes built in with R. And to access that data set, all we're going to use is the data function. And then the data the data that come with R

that I'm going to be referring to and using in this lesson is chick weight. And look, we already this already popped up because it knows um since we're using the data function that this is what we're looking for. And when we run that, we'll see it pops up here in the global environment. And as soon as we want to access the the the data. So let's just run chick weight see what that looks like. You'll see it pops right up here in the data category and we can see all the different

variables in this data frame. So we just ran chick weight and you can see it's a fairly long data frame compared to anything we've been working with so far and we have four columns weight time and diet. And note that you can also, just as a side note, if you want to explore other data sets and play around with this, if you just run data and not put anything in the parenthesis, you'll actually get a nice list of all these different potential data sets that you can use with a a quick little explanation. When you look

into the help menu, you'll you'll which I'm going to go over in a bit, you can learn more information about these different data sets and access them just as easily as we just got the chick weight. Okay, we can so this data frame is really long and it's a little bit cumbersome to have to scroll up and all the way to see what those those different column names were. But there's a neat function called header um or just head for short and we can put in chick weight and this will just give us

the top in this case six values. We can there's a parameter here where we can set how many of the top values you want to see but this just kind of shows you the the immediate few entries so you have an idea of what these data are going to look like. So in this case, weight represents the body weight of each chicken in grams. Time represents the days since birth. Chick is an identifier for each individual chicken. And diet indicates um which diet treatment each chicken received. So this was from some study

comparing different uh different feeds to see how they affect weight and growth over time. Okay. Okay, so let's look at just the diet column. And we can see that it's a long vector of values because it's a it's a fairly long data frame. But notice here at the bottom that it says levels 1 2 3 4. And this is because in this case diet is a factor variable. So factor variables just make it easier to think about and organize categorical data. So in this case, a diet of three doesn't mean

anything. The three just represents it's the third treatment that was used. So in this case, the four is not more than three. Four just represents a different treatment. And thus it's actually a categorical variable in this case. And these could have been character values. It could have been an actual description of what the the different diets were, but they just chose to use numbers for simplicity and made them into a factor variable uh to to describe these different diet treatments. So, let's

actually change these values to make it a little bit more intuitive. And we can actually see what those levels what these levels are by the levels function. So, if we just run the levels function, we can see that we get these four different factor levels and know that they're in quotes because they aren't numeric. They are actually um character values representing these different factor values. And we can rename these four levels by remember how we used the names function to rename names um a named vector. Well, we can

use the levels function and then into this we can define a new set of of values for 1, two, three, and four. Let's say, corn, grain. I'm just making these up, by the way. Rice, let's say chocolate. Who knows? Maybe chocolate's the new way to feed chickens these days. Okay. So when we run that and now let's look at let's run just this. And again I can just run parts of the code by selecting it and then doing the command um enter or control enter. And so now we have a nice vector of

these different treatment values. At the bottom here we can see the levels have indeed been been changed to these new values we've created. And so you can see that by scrolling through the vector. So, let's do a little bit more indexing. Say we want only the measurements within the first five days of each chicken's life. So, just a quick little quiz here. See if you can pause the video and see if you can figure out how to do this there. And note that there's a few ways to do it. So, try to extract all the

data that are within the first five days of each chicken's life. So the way that we can do this, one way we can do it, let's define a new data frame called young. And within this, we're going to put chick weight time. So if we run just this, we can see these are all the days after each chicken was born. Time is less than five. If we run just that, we can see it's all trus and falses whether these values were less than five. So let's save that in and excuse me, this is not a data

frame. This is just a vector of is the chicken young true or false. And then we can index chick weight. We'll just use that vector right in here. So we'll we'll filter out we will save or excuse me we will index all the rows where young is true and keep all the rest of the columns. So this is just a vector of trus and falses representing which rows to keep and leaving that empty to keep all of the columns. And when we run this, you'll see that all of the different time values that we

have here are none of them go over five. And so this is an example where you might want to use the table function that I mentioned before just as a quick summary extraction of what's going on in the data to make sure that this code worked correctly. So we can do table check weight. We'll do time look at the time vector. And so when we run this, we can see that these are all the different time values. So all the different ages and these are the different values in each of those ages. But notice that we still have a lot of

values across all these ages. And that's because we didn't redefine um all the young chickens. So let's just redefine this as as its own uh data frame young chicks. And now we'll put this in the table function. There we go. That makes sense. So we've got 50 values of ages of zero, 50 ages 2, and 49 at ages um four. So we know that this this whole operation worked. And we could have done this a little bit differently. We could have simply done chick weight and then put this right inside

of of the of the indexing rather than defining a separate vector and putting it in. We could have that. You can see it's still correct. We could have written it out like this. That does the same thing. We could have written it out like that. And this would have also done the same thing. And so all of these methods do do the same thing. But note that it's always good practice to refer to columns by their name. So it's better to do this or this than than to use simply an index value for which column

you're referring to. And the reason for that is sometimes data frames uh change in size. You add columns, you take away columns. And so these index values don't really mean a lot anymore. Whereas referring to the column as the time column, it will always be the time column unless you change its name. So, so this is just generally better practice. And then of course using the dollar sign is just a quicker and easier and neater way to write it out. Sometimes we may need to match text when

we're indexing a data frame. And for that we can use the GP function. And what that function allows us to do is to filter based on text content where we only need to match part of the text. So let me show you what I mean by changing something here real quick. Let's change the levels. I'm just copying and pasting this levels code here. And let's just call this I'm just adding on underscore treatment next to each name so that I can prove my point a little bit better in the next part. I'll run

that again. And if we look at chicken diet, we can see that those underscore TRT were added on. So let's say we want all the treatments that used corn. We can use the GP function. let's say corn treatments to look for anything that matches the word corn rather than having to write out this whole value. You know, perhaps maybe we had maybe our first treatment was corn a lot and then our second treatment was corn little. And let's say we don't care whether the chickens got a lot or a

little. We just want to extract all the different corn treatments. And so instead of having to filter out everything that says corn a lot and everything that says corn little separately and then putting them together, we can just filter out everything that has just the word corn in it. And so the first argument of the GP function is pattern. And the pattern we're looking for is corn. Then the x parameter in the gp function or the x argument we're going to look within within chick weight diet.

So when we run this and look what's inside corn treatments here we have a vector of all the different indices where the word corn is present in this vector of diets. We could have alternatively used the gre l function or gpple function which does the same thing but instead of giving us the indices where this is true it gives us a true false value for each element of chickweight diet that the um in terms of whether it contains the word corn. So just adding in the l there. So now it's gpple.

If we run that and look at this, we can see trus and falses for which treatment contains the word corn. Now, if we index like before, we can use either of these, it'll achieve the same result. All rows will index the particular rows that contain corn. When we run this, you'll see that If we look, let's save this as corn data. And then up here, let's look at our corn data in the environment by clicking on that. And so now we have this nice viewer. Again, we can scroll through this. We can also sort the columns here.

Again, this sorting does not affect the actual data frame. It's just for visualization purposes. So you can quickly explore the data in this viewer. So if we click here to sort the data by diet, we can see that corn little and corn a lot are both included. We can scroll all the way down to see that but nothing else. So we successfully filtered the data frame that way. Just like before, we could have instead of we could have omitted this extra step and just written this out just like that. So that's it

for this lesson. It was a bit longer than usual, but but I think it covers all the basics of indexing and filtering data frames. In in quick summary again, we went over what data frames are, how to build a simple data frame. We did some basic filtering and indexing, loaded up some data that that are built into our chickweight in this case, explored those data a little bit, and yeah. All right. So with that, in the next part, I'll go over how you can modify columns within the data frame and create new columns. So thanks so much

for listening and I'll see you at the next part of this lesson. [music]

