Importing Data from Microsoft Excel into R Studio
Welcome back. We're talking about how to import data from Microsoft Excel into R Studio. It's pretty easy to do. There's a couple of tricky edge cases like how do you get data from a separate sheet or from a part of a sheet into into R using your code. It's not difficult. I'm going to walk you through it step by step. We're going to briefly revise uh CSV files, but that's not difficult. Um, one of the things that I think people struggle with very often, especially if you're new to R, is your working directory. How do you find it? How do you change it? Etc., etc. So, we're going to look at that as well.   
Getting Started: Packages
Uh, the first thing I'm going to tell you is hopefully you've learned by looking at other videos about the tidyiverse. I always start any coding off by loading the tidyiverse set of packages. The tidyiverse is a collection of packages that expands the vocabulary of R. And we're going to use one of the packages that comes with the tidyiverse called read x. Read xl in this lesson. Now, interestingly, if you've installed the tidyiverse set of packages, read xl is on your computer. But unlike a lot of the sort of core tidyiverse packages like ggplot and dplyr read xl isn't automatically loaded when you load the tidyiverse. So you have to call it separately. Okay. So that's just worth mentioning. So we've called the tidyiverse but we've separately called read xl using the library uh read xl function. Okay. So that's the one thing that isn't obvious to people. So I'm just pointing that out.   
Working Directories
The next thing is this. I'm going to talk about working directories, right? and and how to set them, how to find out where where your working directory is.   
Best Practice: Projects
In general, the best practice when you start working in R and you start a project is to create a new project. Don't just create a new R file and start coding away. Create a project. If you start a project in R, it will automatically set your working directory to the file where that project is sitting. Okay? And you at that point, you don't need to worry about working directories at all. and that is the best practice.   
Manual Setup
However, I know and understand that people don't always work in projects. So, let's just deal with this working directory issue uh sort of once and for all. If you want to know what your current working directory is, uh you can click on get working directory control enter. And it says here that my working directory is at user Greg Martin documents. Well, that might not be where we want to work. Okay, our data is sitting somewhere else. You can see here I've got a a a folder called YouTube channel and I can click on that. There's some data inside there and that's really where I want to be. Now there's a couple of things you can do here. You could just go in here and say set this as my working directory. And if I click on that, it's going to provide set blah blah blah and it's going to set that as the working directory. It is better practice if you're wanting reproducible code. In other words, you want your code that you can is to set the working directory yourself. And that's pretty easy to do. You say set working directory and then you put in the sort of address of that working directory.   
I will tell you something that's very frustrating, right? If you were to let me let me get up my finder. Okay, here is this folder that we're dealing with. If I were to cut and paste that that address right there, notice something about the address. And I'm going to it might be a little bit small on the screen at the moment, but in between each of the the the sort of branches of the address, the slash is going downwards and R wants the slashes to go upwards or people say backwards slash and forward slash. The slash is going the wrong way. So you can cut and paste that address into this set working directory, but then you got to change the slashes. Wait for it. This gets even more complicated. And and this is this drives me off bonkers. If you're working on a Mac, then the slashes work in the way that it it it it sits uh in in in in your in your finder. So very frustrating, drives you bonkers. This is one of the reasons why I say work in a project, open a project, do everything in a project. Your working directory is set. But if you have to set your working directory, that's how you do it. Okay, so boom, shakala. So if I run that code there, well, I've already set my working directory. Okay, my working directory now is in this place here.   
Importing Files
I've deliberately put the data in a separate folder called data because I want to show you how when you use the functions uh from read XL you need to tell it not just it will automatically start at your working directory and look for the data there but you can say well look for the data inside a folder that's at my working directory in this case we've pulled the folder data uh keeping your data in a separate folder is kind of a good idea and I like to do that it makes your working directory a little less messy and I I usually create a number of folders inside my working directory. So, let's look at the code.   
CSV Files
Now that we've got all of that said, um the first thing that I will say, if I look inside data here, I've got a couple of files. One of them is a CSV file called friends. CSV stands for commaepparated values. Um it's very simple data. It's very flat. There's no uh you know, bells and whistles. You can save uh uh you can save Excel spreadsheets as a CSV file, but it might lose some of the nuance. So, you know, for examp it's not going to keep, for example, some of the sort of um formatting uh that that you may have had. So, if you've got a CSV file, and sometimes you'll download data off the internet and it'll come as a CSV file. So, this isn't uncommon for you to see CSV files as here. We've got read.csv, and you put in inverted commas data. So, that's the folder that we're looking at. Uh uh forward slash or up, I like to say upward slash and then the name of the file.csv. And that will that will read in there you go that data. Now it and there's this little little data set that I created. You may want that to be an object, right? So we may want to call this uh data frame or something. And then we run that and then it lands up. Okay. What I've made a little mistake there. I want that to be that. Okay. Now it's created a little data object. Happy days. And we can work with that. But for the rest of this lesson, I'm not going to create a new data object every time I read in data. I just want to show you how to read in the data. You know that this is how you create a data object when you want to. So let's keep So that's a CSV file. Read it in. Easy peasy lemon squeezy. Nothing to see there.   
Excel Files
If we look at Microsoft Excel, there are some nuances and some complications. And let's talk about those. Here's an Excel spreadsheet. And I've deliberately not put my data on the first sheet, right? because I want to teach you how to find how to tell R to go and fetch it from somewhere else. I've stuck the data on the second sheet and I've also not put it starting up in the top left hand corner. I've popped it over here and we want to tell R to fetch that little square of data. I've deliberately left some blanks. I've put an NA over there. I've done a few things here that we're going to use R to kind of fix and clean up as we go along. I've also got a third sheet and here I've deliberately created some odd names. I've got two uh variable names that are the same. There's a couple of oddities and we're going to talk about how to clean that up in just a second, but let's start with this little bit over here.   
Right, let's go back to R Studio. The first thing is we want to read in an Excel spreadsheet. We've already loaded the package uh read XL. So, we've got access to this function right here, read XL. As with the CSV, we start off by state in inverted commas stating the the the the name of the folder that it sits in and the name of the file xlxsx or an inverted comma. So the first argument is the address and the name of the file that you're wanting. Then you can add arguments to that. So in this case I'm saying sheet equals friends. You'll notice if we look at this Excel spreadsheet I've called the sheet friends. You sometimes give sheets names. I've called it friends down there. So, we say sheet equals friends, skip two. Okay? And I'll tell you what I'm doing there. And you don't really need that line of code, but I'm just wanting to show you if you say skip two, it skips the first two uh rows and it'll start looking after that. The reason I'm saying in this particular example, you don't need to do that is because we are specifically uh we're specifically uh in the next argument uh stating what what range of data we want. So, we've got B3 to D8. If you look here, that's B3 is there, D8 is there. That's our data, right? And because we've we've stated the actual uh range of data, we don't really need to say skip uh rows one and two. Usually the data kind of starts over here somewhere and you can just say skip it. It makes it a bit easier. And if you do that, it'll collect the data from however, you know, however big the data set is. So that is a useful function. Right here I've said and and if I read that in, let's just run that. Here's the data. Um, and it's read that in. Now, the next thing I want to say is I up here I said sheet equals friends. And I just wanted to show you that you could also say sheet equals 2. It's the second sheet. Here I've skipped out that. And if we run that, we get the same thing. Okay. So, you can give the number of the sheet or the name of the sheet. Either works. Just wanted to show you that.   
Column Types
Right. You can also specify uh the class the variable classes, right? So, R will take a best guess and usually get it right, but you may want to specifically specify. So, we've got another we've got a here we've got a an argument called column or col types, column types. If you put in guess, it will take a best guess. And that's the default by the way. If you didn't have this argument in at all, it would put use the guess um kind of uh feature for all of the columns. So if you say guess, it'll do its best guess. But you can specify that you want it to be numeric. You can specify that you're looking at text and it will then make the class of those variables uh numeric or or character. Interestingly, there's not a you cannot force it into classifying something as a factor. So if if you know if it's a categorical variable uh it will it will produce it as a text a character variable and you will have to in your code recode that uh and well not recode it re reformat that and make that into a factor. So I found that interesting. Um anyway so so that's how you and if we run this code let's run it. If you look at the top over here you can see character dbl this just means numeric variable and then character. It's it's it's these it's thinking of those as character variables.   
Data Cleaning
If you look at the dot that we've got, we we had a missing value over here. Let me bring the spreadsheet up. Okay, we've got a missing value there. We've also got we've someone's typed in NA here. And NA is usually what we use to specify that something's missing. So, and this is this reflects the reality of sucking data into into into R is that it's often messy. people don't provide you necessarily with nice clean and neat and tidy data. You have to fix these things. There's a missing piece there. There's an NA over here. There's something missing over here. We've got a zero there under height. So Peter here is considered to be a zero height. Well, that can't be right. Uh so maybe we want to think of that as missing as well.   
Defining Missing Values
So let's see how we can deal with that as we pull our data in. We can specify what needs to be considered as NA or missing. Right? firstly, if something's blank, so this is a concatenation and everything inside this concatenation will be now considered to be NA or missing in the data that it's pulled in. Uh if if it's blank, it'll be considered missing. If it sees NA, it will consider it to be missing or, you know, or not available. And if it sees a zero, it will consider that to be missing. And if we run this code, boom, shakalaka, it's got it all right. it's put NA, which stands for not available or missing, in all the right places. So, happy days.   
Repairing Variable Names
The next thing I just want to talk to you briefly about is the fact that some of the time you may have two variables that are have the same name or you might be a little bit worried about the naming of the variables. I've created a little sheet here with variables that have got odd names. We've got January, January, month of February, blah blah blah blah. So, let's just have a quick look at how to deal with this.   
We first of all might we may have a very large data set with many many many many variables and it might not be obvious whether or not uh the variables are unique or not. So you can use this names\_re equals and say check unique and if you run that and and we've used sheet three here blah blah blah. If you run that it's not going to let you read it in if any of the variables are duplicated. it'll an error will pop up and if you do that boom shaka laka there's our error error and it tells us that it's uh that there's this duplicated jan right you can make all of the variables unique with names repair equals unique okay and if we run that for January and February with the two Januaries it's got Jan 1 and Jan 2. there is a way to kind of make that into Jan\_1 Jan\_2 to uh like I'm not too bothered one way or the next and I'll tell you why in a second.   
Let's just deal with this. You can repair all the variable messiness with this universal names repair equals universal. And that does a few things. I'll just run that and I'll show you. Um it takes month of February, for example, and puts month of Febib. It it it removes funny things like this percent sign and puts a dot there instead. It does. There's a couple of things this does. I'll tell you why I'm not too anxious about this particular feature. I think if you're going to start messing around with the names of your variables, you really want to control that yourself. You don't want some sort of automated uh process to do that for you. You want to control that because you're going to be working with these variables. You're going to be you want to know what they are and why it is that they're called what they are. So, what I would do, my advice to you is this. If you've got a large data set, you're not sure if there's any duplication, run this names repair check unique. find out if there's any duplication or not. Okay, if there is duplication, I would fix that myself, right? With, you know, you with renaming functions, I would just do that myself. I'd write some code and rename the variables in a way and in an order that makes sense to me. I think some of these other features are, you know, kind of nice but unnecessary, but I thought I'd show that to you. I think the name the unique check uh could well be useful.   
Conclusion
Hope all of this was useful. Okay, there are other sort of nuances to to bringing data in, but you know, for the sake of anybody starting out, this this is probably what you need to know. Don't ever change, don't do drugs. Always do your best. Um, like, comment, subscribe, share, etc., etc. Thanks for watching. Take care. Bye.    