Hi everyone and welcome to part three of lesson four on named vectors more on indexing and modifying vectors. First let's just quickly reload our dam centimeter clean vector from the last part of this lesson. I just have the vector right here so you can just run it right off the bat. And so you can also name the elements of a vector to create what are called named vectors. So for example, let's first create a vector of names for our dam centimeters clean vector. And we'll call it species. And within species, we'll

have species one, species 2 and so on. And note that here we created a vector of Whoops, that should be a comma. Created a vector of character variables each indicating the species ID or species name. In this case, species one, species 2 and so on for these different diameters. When we run this run just species, you can see this nice vector of of values here. Now we can use the names function to access and change the names of each element in dam centimeter clean. So if we say names dam cmter clean

and run just that we'll get the value of null and that's because it's unnamed. There are no names. But now that we're accessing the names using the names function, we can assign this vector of names directly to that. And now when we run dam centimeters clean, I'll just paste it there. Now we get those same values, but with each of those values, we have one of these species names that we created in this string here. And what's neat about this is we can also use these names for

indexing. We could say diameter clean. Let's say we want species 3. Put it again. Single or double quotes, doesn't matter. Put it in there. And now we're able to directly index the value of species 3, which is 32 in this case. And just like with numbers, we can create a vector of these species names. Species three and species five. And when we index, we get species three and species 5. Now, there's another type of indexing called logical indexing, which is probably the most common way that you're

going to do all your indexing in R. So, basically, we can apply logical tests directly to our vector. So, for instance, we could say diame cm clean is greater than 20. And now it'll apply this operator is it greater than 20 to every single one of the elements in diame centimeters clean. So we get this vector of trus and falses indicating whether the value is greater than 20. And the thing is we can save this as its own variable. So let's call it is large is is greater than 20 cm large. We'll

call it is large. And then we can use this vector of trus and falses to index diame centimeters clean. And so now we only get the values in this vector that were true using this vector. And more typically you would actually put this logical statement directly into this index to make it easier to make the direct connection. So you could just do dam centimeters clean is greater than 20. Put it right in there. And it's might seem a little bit strange at first that we're using the variable to index. We're using the

variable to index the variable. But hopefully this makes it a little bit uh clear. The way that I had it first separated out here, we're first asking which of these values is greater than 20. And then based on on those trues and falses, we're indexing this same variable in this case. So if we run this, we should get the same result. Just for a quick pop quiz, how would you extract all the diameter values that are less than 20 and greater than 10? Go ahead and pause the video, give it a quick try, and then I'll I'll go over

the answer. All right, so we might do let's call it medium diameters are all of those diame centimeter clean diameters that are Let's use parentheses for organization here. Dam cm clean is less than 20 and diame cm clean is greater than 10. So if we run each of these individually those are all the ones less than 20. Those are all greater than 10. And the and operator means which which of all of these are both true first two and the very last one. So now if we index with this these are the medium diameter

on to modifying vectors with indexing. Let's just create this arbitrary vector here. Instead of you having to type it out, I just included it in the code. Run that. So now we have my vector. and say we want to change all the values that are greater than 20 in this vector into 40. So first let's look at how you would subset those values or index those values. My vector my vector is greater than 20. So these this would be the subset of all of those values that are greater than 20. But again if you run my vector again you

get all the values. Nothing has changed. But to modify these values we can actually assign the value of 40 to this indexed portion of the vector. So if to this indexed portion we use this assign operator and we say 40 then it will take all of the values that are greater than 20. So all of these values in particular that we just indexed and it will replace them with this value of 40. So when we run this and now look at my vector, you can see that we get the vector from before plus all of these different 40

values that represent um the spots the the values from before that were greater than 20. And as I mentioned before, it's a good not to reassign into the same variable you began with because now our original vector no longer exists. So we can let's rerun that so that we have the original vector and we'll create a new vector called my vector modifi mod for modified and we'll just assign oops my vector to that. And then we'll do this again but to my vector modified. So now we have our original vector and

if we run my vector mod we have this new vector where we've changed the values that are greater than 20 to 40. So here's one more example. Let's say we found out that the eighth data point in this vector is not good and so we want to exclude it but we still want to keep all all the data points. We just want to um say that we don't know what this eighth data point is. So let's see it's 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8. It's this 67 that we just don't trust. So what we can do is my vector

mod 2 just create a new one. It's my deck and then oops my vector mod 2 in that eighth element we will assign the value of NA. And notice how just like with true and false values, it turned orange when we typed it out because R know knows that it doesn't that it's not a normal arbitrary variable name, but it has an actual meaning. And that is that data point is missing. And R doesn't know what that data point is. And so that we are being explicit about that unknown nature of that point. We knew it was 67 before,

but let's say the ruler when we were measuring was a faulty ruler. So we don't actually know what the real value is. So now we're replacing it with that NA. So if we run that and then look at my vector mod. Whoops. And that's because I forgot to run this line of code. And then run that one again. Now if we look at my vector mod 2, we get that same vector, but the eighth value is now replaced with an NA. So in quick summary, to modify a vector, simply index the value or values you want to

change and then assign the new value or values directly to that index query. That covers all the basics of using vectors. And to quickly summarize everything we went over in this part of the lesson, we talked about named vectors, using logical indexing of vectors, and then changing vector values using indexing. So soon you'll see that these skills are are fairly universal in R and we'll be using them in the lessons to come when we begin working with data frames and actual data. And in the next lesson,

we're just going to go over a few more really useful functions you'll need to know when dealing with vectors to give you a little bit more of an advantage. There are a few of the really key essential functions that I found that I I run into all the time when I'm doing any kind of analysis. So, I'm just going to go over those in the next lesson. All right. Well, thanks a lot and see you there.

