[music] Hello and welcome to lesson five part two on custom functions and finding help in R. I'll keep this lesson fairly short but I want you to see how you can create your own functions in case you need to apply a unique transformation to your data or some other um unique functionality. Functions get named just like variables when you use uh the function function to create them. You define all the parameters you want inside the parenthesis and then you use curly brackets to surround the content

of the function. So for example, let's say my squaring function and in that variable which will become a function we apply the function function and then here we put in all the different parameters uh excuse me the arguments that we want to use as parameters in the function. In this case, we'll just we'll call it my input. Can name this whatever we want. And then we use curly brackets to enter all the content of the function. So let's say input squared is input squared. And then actually we'll this is my

input. So see whatever parameter we put here we can use inside the function. So in this case we're squaring my input assigning that to input squared. And then at the end of a function you always want the return function to return a particular value from this function when we run it. In this case, we want to return input squared like that. So now to make sure that that we actually save this function and assign it accordingly. So we just have to make sure to run this whole function definition.

And so now we in the environment you can see in the function section we have this function saved. So if we were to run just this, you can see it outputs exactly the function content exactly what the function will be doing. Now let's reload the vector one from the previous part of the lesson. So now if we apply this function to our vector one and run that. Now we get all the values of vector 1 squared because this function essentially just squares all the values. And we can make it a little bit more

complex. We could say we want to square it and then subtract half of the value. So we'll do squared minus 0.5 times my input. put that in parenthesis for clarity. And then we'll call this my we'll just call it my function for now. And down here, instead of my squaring function, we're just calling this other weird function we created that squares and then subtracts half of the original value. And so this is the new the new output of this function. And that's it. That's basically how creating functions works.

And you can make them as complex or as simple as you need for whatever operations you need done. We'll go over in some of the later lessons. I'll I'll go through a few more example functions that you might want to create when when organizing your data and and helping to clean it up. So, we'll be covering many more functions through this course, but if you have any questions or wondering if there is a function that does something in particular that you need, just Google it. I know this is

ridiculous advice since of course Google has all the answers, but seriously, it it really does. And there's no no one that I know of can really get good at R quickly and efficiently without continuously referring to Google. Um, I definitely did so throughout making this course. So, it it really works and I encourage you to do that. There's so much information online about R that really all you have to do is describe what you want to do in R and chances are that you'll find a function for doing it

or at least someone else will have also asked the same question and someone may have responded and and given some given some advice in that respect. All right. Well, that's it for this lesson. Just a quick summary again. Went over how to create your own custom functions. Run this code here to save the function to your environment and then access that function any other time by running that function and supplying any arguments. In this case, there was only one argument, my input. So, we could just put vector

one. You could also say my input equals vector 1. That would be the same thing. And then when you ever whenever you have any questions, please just Google it. Google works great. There's a lot of good information out there. The nice thing is that you can try everything out as soon as you find it online and and learn really quickly that way. All right. So with that uh now that you have all the essential basics of vectors uh in the next lesson we're going to begin working with data frames uh which is the

basic method for storing and using data in R. So I'm excited to go on to that because then you'll be able to start actually working with and using ecological data. So thank you so much for watching and see you in the next lesson.

