[music] Hello everyone and welcome to lesson five part one on some useful functions that I use fairly frequently when I'm working with data in R. And so I just wanted to expose you to these functions so that you can uh see them and start using them and and get the hang of them um early on because you'll be using them fairly often. All right, so I'll jump right in. So first we have a set of basic summary functions or functions that you can apply to a vector of values to extract the mean value, the maximum

value, minimum, the length of the vector, the unique [snorts] values in the vector, a table of how many times each unique value occurs, and an overall summary. So here are just some vectors we have to work with. So first let's run that. So we have vector one in our environment and then we can simply apply the mean function just like this. Of course, as we worked with with functions so far, it's simply writing out the function and then putting in the arguments inside parenthesis. And here we can see that the mean value

of vector 1 is 25.76471. It's as simple as that. We can do the same thing with maximum value. minimum value, the length or the number of elements, the all the different unique values. Oops, vector one. And then we can see how many times each unique value occurs in vector one by using the table function. This is probably the most underrated underrated useful function I've ever used in R. I use it all the time. It's just a great way to get a nice little summary of especially categorical data as you're

working with your data sets in R. So here you can see that the first row values here are each of the unique values in your vector. And below that we have the it's essentially a a named similar to a named vector where we have the names as the unique values and underneath it we have a vector of the number of times each unique value occurs in your data. And then there's the overall summary function which gives you a few of these values all at the same time. the minimum value, the first 25% quantile or the first

quartile, the median value, the mean, the third quartile, and the maximum value. And note that a lot of these functions can also apply to non-numeric vectors. So here we have a vector of DNA nucleotides. And of course, if we tried to apply the mean to this, we'd get an error. But we could apply the table function. Oh wait, we have to run this first. Or maybe I did already. Oh, I did already. Okay. Anyway, so vector to apply the table function. We can see that there are three A's, two C's, one

G, and one T in this vector. And note that you may also have missing values in your vectors. So let's say let's define a new vector just kind of picking random values here but then let's put in an NA. So in this vector we have a missing value represented by the NA. So if we were to try the mean function on this vector the output would actually also be NA. And that's because since na represents a missing value, it's actually impossible to calculate the true mean of this vector since we

don't know what this value is. And for that reason, the mean comes out as NA. But often times you'll still want to know what the mean value is or the maximum or the minimum regardless of these missing values. And in that case, you just add the argument NA. RM, which is short for remove. So NA. equals true and that will simply remove the NAS and calculate the mean while excluding them just like that. All right. So sometimes we need to pick random values from a vector because we need a random

subset of our data for cross validation or because we just want to play around with something and don't need the full data set or maybe we just need a random number for a simulation we're running. Simplest way to do this is using the sample function which takes several arguments. And if you've noticed up until now, whenever we type in a parenthesy, we get this popup which actually helps us see what possible arguments we can add to a function. In this case, for the sample function, first argument or x represents the

vector that we want to sample from. The next argument size is simply how many elements to sample randomly from that vector. And then the default replace equals false means that the values will not be replaced. So it's sampling without replacement. But you can also make that true if you prefer to sample with replacement. And then prob is an argument where you can supply a vector of probabilities with which to sample from X. And the default of prob equals null is simply uh giving equal probability to all the elements in x.

Okay. So let's put in the first argument would be the vector. So let's put in vect one and then size equals five. We'll sample five elements randomly from vector one. So there you have it. And of course if you run this again we'll get five other elements because this is always random. Then the functions r norm and r unif sample values from a hypothetical normal distribution or uniform distribution. So in this case the arguments are n which represents the number of values to sample and then because this is a normal

distribution we can set the mean and the standard deviation and the default mean is zero and the default standard dev deviation is one. So if we just do n equals 5, we'll get five random values from a normal distribution with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Similarly for the um uniform distribution, the first value is the number of samples to take. The second is the minimum value from that uniform distribution and the second and the and then we have the next argument is the maximum value. So we

could do n= 5, min= 5, max= six. So now we'll get five random values between five and six. And that's what we get. All right. Now on to some sorting functions. So sometimes you'll want to sort a vector or find the order of elements in that vector. And it's as simple as applying the sort function. In this case, the default is to sort in ascending order. So these are all the elements in vector one sorted in ascending order. If we wanted decreasing order, we can just type in decreasing

equals true. That's just an additional argument we can add. And now it is that vector in decreasing order. As simple as that. Now remember that up until now every time we apply a function to a vector or v any kind of variable the value the original value of that vector or variable doesn't change unless we were to reassign it. So if we rerun vect one we still get these values. So we'd have to reassign to to itself in order for these values to change and update within that same vector. But we don't want to do that

yet. So, I'm just going to Whoops. I'm just going to comment this out by putting that pound or hashtag there. So, we don't accidentally run that. And you'll find that many times when you're working through the code, you'll type you'll want to look at various aspects of the data throughout the code, but then you don't want those to run later when you're running the entire code. So, you can comment lines of code out just like that. And you can actually use the keyboard shortcut shift command C or

shift control C for PCs. And what wherever your cursor is in the in the code, those lines or where whatever lines of code you select, if they're already commented, then they will uncomment. And if they are not already commented, then they will comment out when you do the shift command C. So I do that fairly often. Just a a neat trick. Okay. So we can also extract the [snorts] order of the elements in vector one based on decreasing or increasing order. And we can just do that with the order function.

When we run this, essentially we get a vector of the indices in vector 1 in ascending order. So for example, this first element of after applying the order function 16 tells us that the first value of an ordered vector 1 would be the the value at element 16 which in this case is the one. So the one would be in the first place. The next value would be the eight. So if we count one two three four five six seven eight that would be this two. And because you have these other twos right there, it's

eight, nine, and 10. And then one tells us that the first element, so in this case, the four would be the next, and so on. So I won't go into more detail than that. It's just a quick way to get the order of a vector and it may come in handy later as you're uh exploring and reorganizing vectors. So, I just wanted to to show you that it's not I don't use it as often, but it's just good to know and keep in mind. All right, so with that, that's it for part one of basic functions. To quickly

summarize, we went over summarizing vectors using some of these basic summary functions. Went over how to pick random values from vectors or from a normal or uniform distribution. And finally, how to sort vectors or extract the order of values from a vector. Uh, next I'll go over how you can actually create your own functions. So, up until now, these functions are fairly black box and you you put in the arguments and out pops an answer or result or or value, but sometimes you might need more complex functions or

unique functions for dealing with your data. And so, next we'll talk about how you can actually create your own functions and uh and also we'll talk about how to find help when you need it as you're coding in R. So with that, thank you so much for listening and see you in the next lesson.

